# Hematometer
An open-source, highly sensitive hemoglobin detection system to quantify neural activity in real-time.

# Overview
Brain activity holds the key to some incredibly valuable information - ranging from health metrics, prosthetics, and even reverse-engineering our thoughts with surprisingly high precision. After all, our thoughts are formed through the collective firing patterns of the trillions of neurons cooperating. Currently; however, the main method of measuring brain activity (EEG) is quite rudimentary, and has experienced minimal development over the past decades. Aditionally, while EEG presents its benefits in a high temporal resolution, which allows us to measure brain activity at a high frame-rate, yet it faces the barrier of a low spatial resolution, which also prevents us from pinpointing the primary occurrence of these electrical signals as well. Unfortunately, the only other alternative to measuring neural activity is a technique known as Electrocorticography (ECoG) is invasive, and extremely expensive - even with the 27X improvement it poses in spatial resolution, it comes with the tradeoff of a relatively low temporal resolution.

# HemAtometer
HemAtometer was developed to bridge the gap between this 'catch-22' of neural activity mapping technology, since it today serves as a major obstacle to the full development of the field of Brain-Computer Interfaces, especially since it holds the key to some extremly valuable solutions to some of our biggest problems, including thought-controlled prosthetics, brain-to-brain communication, and even the transfer of information directtly into our minds. This device functions on a simple principle of spectrometry - when a known quality of light is emitted at a substance, the analysis of its reflection can allow us to reverse engineer its molecular properties, and this can all be done in real-time, as hemoglobin has been shown to have its unique spectral properties, and it also indicates areas of high and low activity in the brain with identical specificity to EEGs. The device was built using quite a simple setup of an Arduino Nano, a USB cable, a breadboard, several jumper wires, soldering tools, a Light Sensor (the specific type has to remain confidential due to future patent concerns), and a 3D-printed casing .


A simple GUI was also developed in the semi-visual programming language NODE-RED, which consists of a Terms and Conditions page, a main chart section, as well as a measuring tool that indicates the concentration of hemoglobin in a solution. The platform can function without extensive training or setup, and it was even made to run without any Wi-Fi.

This device was tested using a 2L bottle of water which was progressively combined with drops of animal hemoglobin, and its sensitivity was measured through ananlysis of the minimum concentration of hemoglobin required in the bottle to exhibit a noticeable differentiation in any one of the several wavelengths that the sensor recorded. As a result, the handheld prototype performed at a clinically releveant sensitivity, and future developments as to its hardware are to come.
